Principle: Learning vs Winning the System

We tend to learn thinking on the overall outcome: an exam, a test, a
certificate. As self-learners, we tend to "hunt-certificates", without actually
learning the concepts in any of them. Focus on learning. Go back to that line,
reread it. Give yourself time to think of the ideas, to create analogies. Make a
story out of it.

Principle: What is success?

What do you consider success? Is it a certificate? Is it a pat on the back from
your friends? Is it a new job? A Guide to the Good Life, by Bill Irvine's,
offers an idea: let's use a tennis analogy. Focus on playing the best game you
can, rather than winning the game. Same works here: your success is you knowing
you did your absolute best. Getting that pat on the back, the job, the wage
increase, is not the goal here - doing your best is. That's your success.

Principle: The Obstacle

I'm a big fan of Stoic authors(such as Ryan Holiday) there is a quote from
Marcus Aurelius, that goes: "The impediment to action advances action. What
stands in the way becomes the way". In essence, what this means is that there is
no way to become what you aim without the work. Once you found an obstacle, you
need to go through it - that impediment becomes the only possible way to achieve
your goal. Without it, there is no growth. Become "anti-fragile". We only grow
with friction. David Goggins, another of my favourite coaches, says that we need
to create those callous on our hands from press-ups. We also need them on our
minds, and obstacles give us the friction we need.

Principle: The Dip

That's a provoking idea: it goes we cannot become whichever we want - for me, I
won't become a football player ( not with my age, anyway). But we can be many
other things. With the limited resources we have, we can efficiently address
them to the best possible pick. The goal here is to take the "noise" out: know
what you cannot do first, then choose what you can do and put all your chips to
it.

Principle: Compound learning

Learning is like compound-interest: skills stack up. With nugget size pieces of
information, we connect the dots and learn efficiently. Stack the little chunks
of knowledge, one on the top of the other, as if they were lego bricks. 

Principle: Failures don't count

Just like Thomas Edison, who learn how not to create the light bulb, I learn how
not to play the Ukelele every day. There aren't failures: there is only
feedback. What is failure? Not achieving a target? If that so, then the only
outcome of a "not success" is feedback, or how not to do it next time. 

Principle: Choice vs Chore

It is widely proven that learning makes our brain smarter and younger. Reframe
your education: it isn't something you HAVE to do; it is something you choose to
do because it is right for you. It is like a diet, or working out: you feel
better, you feel more confident. Approach learning as a choice. For this to work
better, find something which you're interested in, something that makes you feel
useful by learning it. 

Principle: It's all in the frame

We have a particular function on our brain, the one that labels experiences and
categorises them as "good" or "bad". Sometimes, by reframing a specific
situation, we can turn them from "bad" to "good". Take this example: nobody
likes deep-cleaning the house (I believe). Let's reframe it: how about, rather
than think of deep-cleaning you reframe it this way: I'll have a few hours to
put a podcast on and focus on what that have to say. Reframing is looking at
experiences from a different perspective, and labelling them as good, rather
than mediocre.

Principle: Pareto Principle

Also known as the 80/20 rule: 20% of the effort is equal to 80% of the result.
The majority of us knows this principle already, on some variation. For me, it
is 20% of the customers bring 80% of the revenue. That's a straightforward
concept, meaning we need only to focus on 20%, and still get the 80% result we
want.

Principle: Skill stacking

The key takeaway here is not to be the absolute best on one field: but to create
your niche, your dimension, where your skills (or the inter-dependency of them)
can design your job spec. Stack different skillsets to become unique.

Principle: Happiness Factors

We're emotional beings. Our mood profoundly affects how we do in any particular
task, learning as well. So keep happiness factors at hand, so you can measure
how happy you are. When you're feeling down, use the "cookie jar" concept. David
Goggins coined the term, and it means to store all of your accomplishments and
to remember them when you're feeling you can't do something. It is a powerful
concept, and it helps me to remember how much I've achieved.

<https://brainboostedshop.com/blogs/blogs/the-cookie-jar-method>

Principle: Productive Time

Find your time patterns. Experiment and see which part of the day works best of
you. For me, it is in the morning. The smell of freshly brewed coffee, the
quietness and the sunrise makes me feel productive. I accomplish most of my work
(pomodori) during the morning when there are no notifications, people are still
sleeping, and there is a lot of time ahead of you.

\------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lies: Follow your passion

Being passionate about something is often overrated. Sometimes, we follow our
passions and, they become a nightmare, simply because we stop enjoying them (or
being excited about them). Imagine you're passionate about music, but you're
terrified of playing in front of people. Are you going to become a musician?
Most likely not, because then your passion would become a hindrance. Find
something you're good at, and explore the confidence/competence loop: you get
more confident by getting more competent, and that creates a loop. One drags the
other. 

Lies: You can avoid "risk".

That is counter-intuitive. There is no such thing as avoiding risk, as it is
everywhere - without it, there isn't progress. Risk is what makes us try
different solutions, is what put stuff on the line. Take risks. Face them.
Head-first.

Lies: Trust this one person

There isn't one single path to success. Learn from different sources and
question every single one of them. Widen your realm of possibilities, by
following multiple ways simultaneously: we have the advantage to have a myriad
of resources to use. 

Lies: 10.000 Hours rule

Practice matters, but it isn't the whole story: is only the tip of the iceberg.

Concepts like genetics, happiness factors and other elements are also crucial
for mastery. We don't play on an even playfield. Life isn't fair.

\--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pillars: Everything is game

This pillar is the "fixed mindset" against the "growth mindset". Due to
neuroplasticity, our brains grow, physically, by being used - it is a muscle.
With the growth mindset, we come to understand that there isn't such thing as "I
can't learn how to do this" - we add the "yet" at the end. By doing so, we cut
out the negative talk on our minds. We keep growing and keep getting smarter;
our capacity is not set in stone. Everything is a game. Everything is a
challenge to overcome.

Pillars: Feynman Technique

The Feynman technique is the process of striping down a concept to its most
simplistic form: to uncover the building block, the elemental core if one
particular idea, to teach others. One learns by teaching other people, and
through this technique, teaching becomes more natural.

Pillars: Trunk based knowledge

Knowledge is a tree: most often than not, the elemental truths of different
fields sit on top of one general idea. The building blocks of experience,
they're all intertwined in one grand scheme. So if you focus on the roots, it is
easier to reach the top of the tree.

Pillars: Efficiency trumps grit

I like to think of this pillar with an analogy, from coding: grit is the "brute
force" method. Imagine you're trying to hack a password, and the grit is writing
a code that works every possible answer. Efficiency is something entirely
different. On this context, it'd be to design an elegant program that finds the
solution in the most efficient way and in the least possible timeframe.

\--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science

Focus vs Diffuse mode

We have two different systems installed on our brain, and we need to switch
between them to learn better. To do so, we need to share our time and attention
between the two. Short bursts of focused mode followed by leisure activities,
daydreaming and mind-wandering. This dynamic creates broader connections between
our neurons.

The Science of Sleep

Not only our brains create long-term memories during sleep (I like to think of
it as if it was backing up our minds) but research also points to the conclusion
that there is a "rinsing" procedure that occurs while we sleep. Brain flushes
out toxic molecules from our brains, and lack of sleep prevents our mind from
performing better.

Brain Training

We create new neurons throughout our lives, but without using them, they end up
dying. The brain is a muscle, so if you do not exercise it, it atrophies.
Physical activity is ideal here, too, as the main task of our brains is to
control our body. It helps us switch to the diffuse mode of thinking. By
learning, we engage our minds to create new connections between neurons.

The Science of feedback

There are two types of feedback: negative and positive. Positive feedback is
ideal for when you're learning a new skill, and you need the encouragement to
keep trying. Once you reach a certain level, though, you're better off with
negative feedback, so you know which points to tackle to improve.

Procrastination

We avoid doing specific tasks because we find them too difficult (in this case
we're putting off doing that task because we're afraid of failure). Or we find
that the activities that we're about to perform do not help us reach our final
goal (meaning that we don't see them valuable).

Remember these steps, to stop procrastinating:

1.  F\*\*k, let's try it! (Reject the negative self-talk)

2.  Start sloppy (don't put too much pressure on yourself - it's okay to suck at
    the beginning.

3.  Start small (chunk it!)

Long and short-term memory

That's how I like to think of it: Long-term memory is our H.D. That's where we
store our "downloaded" memories, and we can access them easily. Our short-term
memory is the buffer. That's when you're watching a Youtube video, and the
buffer bar is loading. Within our short-term memory, we have something called
the "working memory". That's the RAM working; you're processing the current
"problem" with it. Imagine someone gives you three numbers, to apply Pitagora's
Theorem. Now, your short-term memory will store the three numbers, will go on
your hard drive and find the formula (which you learnt in secondary school, and
through repetition did not forget), and your working memory creates the bridge
between them.

Active vs Passive learning

Passive learning is when you watch Youtube videos, see people practising and
"learn". I like to think of this with an analogy: I practice Brazilian
jiu-jitsu. Even though I see videos on Youtube, read books and analyse other
people fighting, I won't learn until I engage in the activity actively. I need
to practice something deliberately to learn more effectively.

The Science of motivation

There are two types of motivation. External motivation (things such as money, a
job prospect, or one desired outcome) and internal motivation, also called
drive. David Goggins talks about this clear distinction, where he says that
motivation is not enough. Motivation it's connected to an external factor, to
something which prompted you to do it. Drive, on the other hand, is inherent:
you do it because it has you internalised the concept.

Goals

We have a part of our brains that trigger the "fight or flight" mode, the
amygdala. It triggers when we feel uncertain, or fear (which could be any sort
of fear, physical or emotional) and that can hinder our learning. To bypass this
defence mechanism, we can set goals which will ensure small increments towards
our ultimate goal. This way, we end up "tricking" the amygdala. This small
increments will compound, and after a series of tiny little steps, we reach
mastery. Use the "S.M.A.R.T." Goals workflow. 

It pays not to be busy.

We often think that someone busy all the time is doing something right is wrong.
Being busy shows nothing but a lack of time management skills. Research shows
that elite violinist players engage in free time to "aerate" their minds. It is
as essential to give yourself a break and practice a hobby to improve cognition
and learning, rather than work non-stop for several hours.

Chunking

The idea of chunking is to break down big projects into smaller pieces, to
better go through them. I like to think of this as if I was chopping some
tomatoes (pomodori) to put on a tomato sauce. If you cut them in smaller pieces,
they cook faster. Same works for learning: by chunking them into digestible
nuggets of information, we process them better and quicker.

Part of re-applying these concepts is to put the chunks back together and
connect the dots between them. I like to think of this as if the lumps were lego
bricks, and we can hold up to four blocks at one time in our RAM (working
memory).

How to solve problems

Focus is essential to solving problems, but as they get complicated and the
solutions less intuitive, we're better off letting our minds cool off and engage
on our diffuse mode of thinking. By doing so, we give our brains the space to
think horizontally, to "run some tests on the background", so the solution can
come to us alternatively, from a creative perspective.

Deliberate practice

Deliberate practice(D.P.) is about the struggle. When you reach that point, just
at the edge of your capabilities (also known as your comfort zone) you get
frustrated, you feel anxiety, you feel the fear of failing. That's the D.P.
zone. Here is where we need to keep focused, to break it down, to find
alternative solutions for the issue at hand. That's the approach to take when we
hit that glass ceiling when we approach that plateau area of our capabilities.
I, particularly, feel an uncomfortable sensation on my stomach when that
happens, as if there were butterflies in it. That's my cue for practising
something deliberately.

Spaced repetition

That's the process of engaging in repeating the learning process over different
time frames. Rather than cramming knowledge into blocks, we chunk it up and
repeat it over time. This practice strengthens the synapses on our neurons,
which, in turn, turn this knowledge into long-term memory. The idea of spreading
practices throughout time rather than cramming all into blocks helps our brains
to digest the experience better and to record on our inner hard drive more
comfortably.

Habits as energy savers

"You create your habits, and your habits create you" - this is the idea that
practices save us time and energy by taking some variables out: it prevents us
from focusing on tasks that we can do automatically. Daniel Kahnemann talks
about "systems" on our minds, and the auto-pilot system performs the vast
majority of jobs daily. Habits help us to create this auto-pilot. 

Be adventurous

Experiencing the novelty element enlarges our brain. We're emotional beings, so
our state of mind when learning something matters. By trying different things,
and being adventurous, our minds take on things a lot easier than usual. The
monotony is the enemy here. 

Have an endpoint

I like to think of this as if I was an employer, and my brain is the employee. I
need to tell my member of staff what time to finish so that it can turn itself
off after a long day of work. Rest is well-needed and establishing a specific
point in time helps our brain focus better.

Be bored

We often think we can't focus properly nowadays - I do not believe it so. We're
overstimulated. We do not give ourselves time to be bored, to let our minds
wander, to spend some time thinking. We associate being silent and think about
life as a negative experience because it feels somewhat unpleasant. 

\--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Technique: Pomodoro Technique

To beat procrastination and to focus better: enters the Pomodoro technique. It
transforms a unit of time (Pomodoro) in 25 minutes of focused work and 5 minutes
for a quick break. Our brains can focus on for an average of 25 minutes, so the
technique offers a way to have undivided attention throughout smaller periods.

Technique: Chunking

By breaking down the problem, chunking in smaller parts, it is easier to tackle
the overall problem. That can be done through a road map, through a first
analysis of the issue or even chunking it to fit on the Pomodoro technique's
framework.

Technique: Deliberate practice

The practice consists of challenging our brains to go over the edge of our
comfort zone. Cues here include frustration, physical discomfort, and the
feeling you can't complete the task. That's when we're learning and creating new
pathways in our brains. Deliberate practice is what experts in many fields do to
achieve mastery.

Technique: Create a road map

How do you reach somewhere without knowing which steps to take? That's where a
road map is paramount. Planning which steps to take, breaking down parts to
divide the project and how to put them back together, and how to apply a time
frame to each chunk (with the Pomodoro technique). Having a road map is the only
way to organise your work and to use the other methods as a combo.

Technique: Interleaving

Using different resources for the same knowledge is a great way to apply this
technique. In essence, research shows that interleaving helps the brain remember
one strategy and apply it to different contexts, broadening the pathways between
neurons. 

Technique: Einstellung(integrative complexity)

Here is where even experts are at fault. Einstellung means being blinded by your
unique expertise, so you can't see new solutions for different problems. You can
apply the "fighting the last war" concept. There is a reason why outsiders (of
one given industry, let's say) have a fresh set of eyes and usually succeed big
on fields that are not their own. They can look at the problem with a new
perspective, applying creative solutions to issues at hand. Do not let your mind
become mechanised, and dismiss, automatically, people's perceptions of your
problem. Is always helpful to consider it from a different perspective, and
peers can aid you in it. 

Technique: Community

Learning is a social activity, and we're emotional beings. We excel in such
environments, as our brains evolve to reward social interaction. A community can
give you instant feedback, and that will help you see your blind spots. It also
makes learning fun.

Technique: Habits

Habits are energy savers. They automate much of our daily tasks by preventing us
from thinking about one particular job to focus on others. That's the reason why
Mark Zuckerberg always wears the same outfit, and Barack Obama only has blue
suits. Habits give us the time and the energy to think about significant issues
and problems, without using it to focus on automated activities.

Technique: System vs Goals

Systems are what you'd call a "system of goals". That's the entire ecosystem,
and they are easier to follow as well. I like to think of this as the overall
long-term goals, or the cluster of goals I have in a more extended period ( a
year, let's say). My theme for the season is experimenting.

Techniques:

The power of the senses

By engaging our senses throughout learning, we encode memories with more ease.
Visualising and using other tools to expose our senses actively, we achieve
better effects with our education (and overall experience). Try to put some
baroque music while you study, or re-arrange your study with different smells.
It is a powerful thing. Find your inner child, imagine your exclusive
dimension. 

Techniques: Method of Loci

The idea here is to transform physical locations in "memory slots". For me, I
use rooms in my flat, such as my living room and kitchen. I'll choose five
"memorable memorabilia" and use them as "hangers" to hang ideas. Say I need to
remember something, and I do so by imagining that thing (person, idea) sitting
on my couch, wearing a fantasy, or doing something awkward. Make as ridiculous
as possible, so it is easier to proxy the memory from your hard drive. 

Techniques: Pareto Principle

The idea here is to find the 20% that you give you 80% of the result. Imagine
you are learning a new language (French for me), I could, with the Pareto
Principle, find out the 20% most spoken words of the language and focus on
those. With those words, I can make out 80% of the entire vocabulary of the
language. Focusing on that "chunk" will give me the highest return for my
investment of time. If we think about time as if it was money, everything
becomes a trade-off. We want to use our most limited resource (time) wisely, and
this technique helps us to do so. 

Techniques: Parkinson's

Have deadlines for everything. The time it takes you to finish a task is how
much time you allocated for that same task. Remember university, when you'd
leave the essay for the last minute? Nobody will ever finish it by the first day
if you have three to do it. So give yourself deadlines, so that your brain knows
by when that task needs to be finished. It is a sort of guidance.

Technique: Stakes & Rewards

Stakes and rewards are essential: if we treat learning as a videogame, we need
to have stuff on the line to propel us to achieve our goals. Rewards are crucial
too. Say you have the intention to work out every day for an hour, and on the
last day, because you've already racked 7 hours of weekly exercise, you reward
yourself with a Ben and Jerry's. That's beneficial for our overall system of
goals.

Technique: Concepts vs Facts

Concepts are the elemental blocks of one particular idea. Like with the physics
model, where we strip one given idea to its most inner core (by using the
Feynman technique) whereas facts are only one piece of information, usually
without any connection. Concepts are the roots of the tree, and facts are the
leaves. You need to understand the base ideas to apply trunk-shaped learning. 

Technique: Test yourself

You need to put yourself on situations where you're prone to failure. Where you
struggle. Without them, there is no growth. Using a sports analogy: when we work
out, we prompt our muscles to inflammation by applying friction on them. That's
how they get bigger and more efficient. Same happens with our brain. They need
to be put to the test, to struggle, to broaden the pathways. We need to make
mistakes, all the time. It is the only way to learn effectively. Remember: there
aren't failures. There is only feedback.

Technique: The first 20 hours

In the early twenty hours of practice, that's when we acquire a new skill; they
matter the most. Throughout this time, our brains encode the memories for this
new skill, and those pathways will be used throughout practice. They're crucial.
Planning with a road map and executing flawlessly and focused are the way to go
here. 

Technique: How we learn

Theorised by Daniel Kahnemann, it goes like this: We have two basic systems
installed on our brain. System 1 is the auto-pilot. It goes back and forth,
finding patterns and spitting out answers in split seconds. That's the guy who
makes mistakes on multiple-choice questions because he forgot to read the entire
matter. System 2, on the other hand, is the focused guy, but he's also lazy. He
has limited resources to apply to experience, that's why System 1 (prone to
bias) takes the wheel through the majority of our daily tasks, to save energy.
We need to activate System 2 to focus, but the switch between these two
personalities is an excellent place to learn. Transforming a short-term memory
to long-term memory is a task they do it together. 
